BirdCLEF2025 Competition Summary

Acknowledgements

Thank you to the organizers for hosting such an amazing and well-structured competition. I also appreciate the inspiring public notebooks (e.g., from @salmanahmedtamu) and excellent solutions from previous years.

Congratulations to all the top teams—especially to my teammate for achieving Grandmaster status! I'm sincerely grateful for his invaluable support throughout this competition.

The details of our solution is listed below:

1. Training Data and Validation Strategy

Like many participants, we used the full BirdCLEF 2025 dataset for training. However, to achieve more stable cv-lb results, we expanded our training set by including 102 additional categories from the BirdCLEF 2023 dataset.

Specifically, we used 80% of the BirdCLEF2023 + 100% of the BirdCLEF2025 data for training, and the remaining 20% of BirdCLEF2023 for validation. This strategy provided a rough indication of model convergence. While the CV-LB correlation was still not perfectly stable, it was much more consistent compared to our earlier attempts.

Additionally, we collected extra data from the following sources:

Xeno-Canto
iNaturalist
We also cleaned parts of the CSA dataset using a public notebook to remove human voices and manually filtered the remaining samples for quality assurance.

Moreover, our training data included train_soundscape audios with pseudo labels generated by an ensemble of models trained on the dataset described above.

2. Models

Our final system combined both CNN-based and SED-based models, utilizing the following backbones:

tf_efficientnet_b0_ns
tf_efficientnetv2_b3
tf_efficientnetv2_s.in21k_ft_in1k
mnasnet_100
spnasnet_100
We used two sets of Mel spectrograms with the following parameters (The only variation between the two sets lies in
the n_mels parameter, which was set to either 128 or 96):

mel_spec_params = {
 "sample_rate": 32000,
 "n_mels": 128 or 96,
 "f_min": 0,
 "f_max": 16000,
 "n_fft": 2048,
 "hop_length": 512,
 "normalized": True,
 "center": True,
 "pad_mode": "constant",
 "norm": "slaney",
 "mel_scale": "htk",
}
3. Training Strategy

Sampling:
Random sampling outperformed fixed-first-5s and RMS-based approaches.
Augmentations:
We followed augmentation strategies from prior competitions (cutmix, mixup, sumix) and added additional human
voice noise as background noise for robustness.
Loss Function:
Both CNN and SED models were trained with Focal Binary Cross Entropy (Focal BCE) loss.
Model Soup:
We applied model weight averaging across multiple checkpoints to stabilize final predictions.
4. Final Submission

We applied a rank-aware post-processing strategy inspired by:
Post-processing with power adjustment
This helped adjust low-confidence predictions based on ranking.

All models were exported to ONNX format for fast inference.
Ensemble of 20 models: 10 CNN models and 10 SED models (5 backbones x 2 sets of mel params). This submission can reach private lb=0.927. However, our best lb is achieved by 6 models each, without mnasnet and spnasnet backbones.